AAText 0.12 - antialiased TrueType text for AmigaOS 3.2
======================================================

AAText makes Workbench and applications draw TrueType fonts antialiased
(smooth) on RTG screens: icon labels, menus, window and screen titles,
Shell windows, GadTools, ReAction and MUI programs - everything that
draws text through graphics.library.

It needs no setup. Every TrueType font installed on your system is
detected automatically and drawn smoothly in every size, with the
correct character set (including Turkish, Central European etc. code
pages). Bitmap fonts such as topaz are left untouched.

AAText does not replace any system library. It patches four
graphics.library functions while it runs and removes the patches
cleanly when you quit it.


Requirements
------------

- AmigaOS 3.2 or newer (developed and tested on 3.2.3)
- 68020 or better
- An RTG graphics system with cybergraphics.library, e.g. Picasso96
  (P96). Tested with WinUAE (UAEGFX) and PiStorm (Emu68).
- TrueType or OpenType fonts installed with a font manager (e.g.
  ttf.library, or freetype2.library with FTManager), so that each font
  has a .otag file next to its .font file in FONTS:

Screens with 15, 16, 24 or 32 bit colour are drawn antialiased. AGA and
other palette screens (256 colours or fewer) are not changed.


Which file?
-----------

  AAText         68020, 68030, 68040, PiStorm/Emu68, WinUAE.
                 Use this one unless you have a real 68060.
  AAText.060     Real 68060 CPUs with FPU only. The 68060 lacks some
                 instructions the 68020 version uses; they would be
                 emulated by 68060.library and slow down font loading.
                 Does not run without an FPU (e.g. 68LC060).
  AAText.debug   68020 version that writes diagnostics to the serial
                 port. Only needed for bug reports (see below).


Installation
------------

1. Copy AAText (or AAText.060, renamed to AAText) to SYS:WBStartup.
   AAText then starts with Workbench, after the RTG system.

   Alternatively copy it to C: and add this line near the end of
   S:User-Startup:

       Run >NIL: C:AAText

2. Optional: the preferences program. Copy AATextPrefs and
   AATextPrefs.info to SYS:Prefs. For the Turkish user interface also
   copy the catalog:

       Copy Catalogs/türkçe/aatextprefs.catalog LOCALE:Catalogs/türkçe/

   Without AATextPrefs the defaults are used, or a settings file you
   write by hand (see "Settings").

3. Reboot, or start AAText by hand. Windows that were already open are
   drawn smoothly as soon as they are redrawn (e.g. resize them or
   close and reopen them).


Usage
-----

  AAText              Start (from Shell: Run >NIL: AAText)
  AAText QUIT         Stop and remove the patches
  AAText PREFS=file   Start with another settings file
  AAText RELOAD       Running copy: read the settings file again
  AAText STATUS       Running copy: show version, settings and cache use

Starting AAText a second time - from Shell or by double-clicking its
icon - stops the running copy, so the icon works as an on/off switch.
Ctrl-C (or Break) on its process stops it as well.

If another program patched the same functions after AAText, AAText
cannot be removed safely. It then switches itself off (all text is drawn
by the system again) and stays in memory; quit the other program first
and try again.


Preferences program
-------------------

AATextPrefs changes the settings in a window, in English or Turkish
(as set in the Locale preferences). If AAText is running, every change
is used at once, so you see it on the screen and in the preview line
while you try it out.

  Save    keeps the settings permanently (ENVARC: and ENV:)
  Use     keeps them until the next reboot (ENV: only)
  Cancel  returns AAText to the settings it had before

  Appearance  gamma, hinting, real character widths, kerning, preview
  Programs    the programs AAText leaves alone (blacklist): type a
              name, choose the program file with "Choose...", or pick
              one from "Add a running program...". The program need
              not be running; AAText recognises it by its name.
  Advanced    automatic font detection, off-screen bitmaps, cache size
              (with the current use), character set, and "Write
              Turkish ENV:ftcodepage" (see Tips)

The menus offer Open..., Save As..., Reset To Defaults, Last Saved and
Restore, like the system's Prefs programs.

"Real character widths" and "Kerning" take effect when AAText is
restarted; all other settings change at once. Comments and font mappings in the
settings file are kept when AATextPrefs saves it (mappings are edited
in the file only).

Shell options: LANGUAGE=türkçe (or english) chooses the language,
PUBSCREEN=name opens the window on another public screen.


Settings
--------

The settings file is optional; AATextPrefs writes it for you. AAText
reads ENV:AAText.prefs, or if that does not exist, ENVARC:AAText.prefs.
It is a plain text file with one setting per line; lines starting with
# are comments. AAText.prefs.example describes every setting.

  gamma 0.8         Edge sharpness, 0.5 - 4.0 (default 0.8). Lower
                    values give thinner, crisper text; higher values
                    bolder text.

  real on           Use the TrueType font's own character widths
                    (default off). Text looks more natural, with the
                    letter spacing the font designer intended, but
                    window layouts change slightly. Start AAText from
                    WBStartup when you use this: windows opened before
                    AAText keep their old layout until reopened.
                    Fixed-width fonts (e.g. the Shell font) always keep
                    their character cells, since the Shell and editors
                    position text by them.

  kerning on        With "real on": move letter pairs such as AV, To or
                    Ye closer together, as the font specifies (default
                    on). Uses the font's "kern" table; fonts that keep
                    their kerning only in a GPOS table (e.g. Tahoma) are
                    not kerned. Applies within one piece of text drawn at
                    once. Like "real", it changes when AAText restarts.

  hinting normal    How letters are fitted to the pixel grid:
                    none   - no hinting: smoothest, closest to the
                             font's design
                    light  - vertical alignment only: soft but clean
                    normal - the font's own hints (default)
                    full   - classic full hinting: crispest, most
                             "pixel-like"

  blacklist Name    Programs AAText must not touch, e.g.
                    "blacklist FinalWriter TypeSmith". Use the program
                    name as shown by the Workbench or the Shell command
                    name; case does not matter. Several lines allowed.

  cache 256         Memory for rendered characters in KB (32 - 16384,
                    default 256).

  offscreen on      Some programs (docks, gauges) draw text into a
                    hidden bitmap first. AAText cannot tell which screen
                    colours apply there and leaves such text alone. With
                    "offscreen on" it uses the Workbench screen colours
                    (default off).

  auto off          Switch off automatic font detection; only the
                    explicit mappings below are used.

Explicit mappings are rarely needed. They draw a bitmap font, or a font
whose .otag file is missing, with a TrueType file:

  topaz 8 -> FONTS:_ttf/DejaVuSansMono.ttf
  "Some Font" 16 -> "FONTS:My Fonts/x.ttf" 14 real

Name (without .font; quotes if it contains spaces), size, "->", the
TrueType file, then optionally the pixel size and "real". Without a
pixel size AAText picks the size whose widths best match the bitmap
font. "charset latin5" selects ISO-8859-9 for explicit mappings and for
detected fonts whose .otag file has no code page (see Tips).

A mistake in the file is reported with its line number when AAText is
started from the Shell.


Tips
----

- Icon labels with a solid box behind them: in Prefs/Font, "Select
  Workbench Icon Text...", set the Mode to Text + Outline (or Shadow).
  The outline is drawn smoothly as well and looks much better on
  patterned backdrops.
- If text looks too thin or too bold on your monitor, try gamma values
  between 0.6 and 1.4.
- Turkish (or another code page) with freetype2.library: FTManager
  writes no code page into the .otag file, so freetype2.library and
  AAText both use ENV:ftcodepage, or ISO-8859-1 without it. For Turkish
  press "Write Turkish ENV:ftcodepage" in AATextPrefs (Advanced), or
  copy the included file:
      Copy ftcodepage.latin5 ENVARC:ftcodepage
      Copy ftcodepage.latin5 ENV:ftcodepage
  AAText uses it at once; in other programs, fonts generated by
  freetype2.library before keep their old characters until the system
  is restarted. (ttf.library stores the code page in each .otag file
  and needs nothing.)


Limitations
-----------

- TrueType and OpenType outlines (.ttf, .ttc, .otf). Type 1 and
  Compugraphic fonts are drawn by the system as before.
- Palette screens (AGA, 256 colours or fewer) are not antialiased.
- A font used for the first time is loaded in the background; its very
  first line of text may appear unsmoothed.
- Text drawn into hidden bitmaps is left alone unless "offscreen on" is
  set.


Bug reports
-----------

Please include the output of the debug version:

1. Install Sushi (Aminet dev/debug/Sushi) and start it in a Shell:
       Run >NIL: sushi >RAM:aatext.log
2. Start AAText.debug instead of AAText, reproduce the problem, then
   run "AAText.debug QUIT".
3. Send RAM:aatext.log together with a description or screenshot.


History
-------

0.12  Preferences program AATextPrefs (English and Turkish): changes
      are shown at once, Prefs menus, GlowIcon. AAText takes new
      settings from it while running.
      ENV:ftcodepage is read again when the settings change, so a new
      code page works without restarting AAText.
      Pair kerning with real metrics ("kerning on", default): letter
      pairs such as AV or To move closer, as the font's kern table says.

0.11  OpenType fonts with PostScript (CFF) outlines, e.g. installed
      with freetype2.library and FTManager. ENV:ftcodepage is honoured
      like freetype2.library does; ftcodepage.latin5 included.
      New setting "hinting none | light | normal | full" to choose how
      letters are fitted to the pixel grid, from smoothest to crispest.

0.10  Fixed-width fonts always keep their character cells, also with
      "real on". With real metrics the Shell could leave half-erased
      letters when deleting and gaps after Tab completion.

0.9   Text is now placed exactly like the original bitmap font: it
      appeared shifted up by a pixel or two, most visibly in screen
      and window title bars.
      With "real on" the TrueType size is chosen so that capital
      letters are as tall as in the original font.

0.8   First public release.
      - Automatic TrueType detection via .otag files, all sizes,
        code page from the .otag file
      - Real metrics mode (real on), bold/italic/underline styles
      - Glyph cache, blacklist, offscreen option


Credits
-------

FreeType: AAText uses the FreeType 2 font engine (version 2.14.3). This
software is based in part on the work of the FreeType Team. Portions of
this software are copyright (C) 2026 The FreeType Project
(https://freetype.org). All rights reserved.

AROS: the measuring code of the real metrics mode (TextExtent and
TextFit) is derived from AROS, Copyright (C) 1995-2026 The AROS
Development Team. That part (src/metrics.c) is available as source code
under the AROS Public License 1.1 (file LICENSE.APL) at
https://github.com/Sdursun/AAText; the changes made are listed in it.


Author and license
------------------

Serkan Dursun - https://github.com/Sdursun/AAText
Bug reports and suggestions: https://github.com/Sdursun/AAText/issues

AAText is released under the MIT License (see the file LICENSE.txt):
you may use, copy, modify and distribute it for any purpose, commercial
or not, as long as the copyright notice is kept. Source code is
available at the address above. The code derived from AROS is under the
AROS Public License 1.1 instead (see Credits).
